Let's now define the column tracks of our layout,
and then place the grid items in it,
so that we end up with our final design.
So let's now think about the column tracks of this design.
So it's very common in web design to use a design grid,
with like eight or 12 or 16 predefined columns.
And so that's also what we're gonna do in here.
Now it may not really be necessary for this design,
but as I mentioned, grid systems like this one
are widely used in web design.
So, for example, Bootstrap has a 12 column grid.
And many other design systems out there
work the exact same way.
And so that's why I wanted to teach you here
how we can use that as well.
So we start with an eight column grid here,
so something very simple.
And then I'm gonna keep adding some stuff,
but we're gonna build it step by step
so it makes all the sense to you.
So let's start with the eight column layout.
Imagine that we wanted just a very, very simple
eight column layout.
All we have to do is to say grid-template-columns,
and then repeat eight and one fr, right.
So this would produce eight equally sized columns
occupying the entire viewport.
And that's exactly what it would look like.
So the first row here, remember,
has 80% of the viewport height.
And so our nine grid items would fill these eight columns
in here and then add another item down here
in the second row.
But that's not quite what we want,
because what we want is actually to have
like this fixed here in the middle of the viewport, right.
So we want like, for example, in here,
we want this here to have always the same width
this entire part, right.
So we have this here, and then centered nicely
in the viewport, like we're used to having it.
And so what that means is that these columns in the middle,
they have actually a fixed width.
And let me actually show you the grid inspector here,
so that it makes it a bit easier to understand.
Okay, and you see that these are the eight columns
that I was talking about.
So one, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, and eight.
So these are our main eight columns.
So we want them to have a, like a fixed width, right.
So let's do that.
And remember that usually we use something like 1140 pixels
or 1200, so something between 1100 and 1200
I think would be reasonable.
And so let's divide 1140 by eight,
that is approximately 142 pixels.
So let's simply say that it's 140 pixels
and make it 14 rem.
Because remember, 14 rem translates to 140 pixels.
So let's take a look at that now.
And so that's what it looks like.
But now suppose that we decrease our viewport,
and it doesn't even adapt at all.
And that makes total sense, because this is just
a fixed-width columns.
And so I already showed you in the last section
how we can fix that.
And so what we're gonna use here is the minmax function.
So we say it that the maximum should be 14 rem,
but it can be lower.
But never below the min content.
So the minimum size that it should have in order to fit
the content in there.
So let's think about it again.
So we want to have eight columns, and we want the width
of each of these columns to be between their minimum content
and 140 pixels.
So let's take a look at that now.
And here we go.
So now it actually is starting to adapt
to the viewport width.
But also it never grows larger than these 140 pixels
for each of the columns.
So that's kind of what we want already.
Also, we want something else, and that's this sidebar here.
So you see that we have these eight columns here
in the middle, but the on the left side we have
the sidebar.
And so that's also a column track.
So let's add that here as well.
And we want it to be 80 pixels wide, so eight rem.
So just like that, we added another column.
So right now we have eight rem for the sidebar,
then our 14 rem columns beside that.
So let's take a look at that again.
And so here, here you have the sidebar.
And so now the last step is to actually, basically center
these eight columns between this end of the viewport
and this sidebar.
Because we don't actually want this to be centered
in the viewport, but let's say, between the sidebar
and the end of the page.
And so how can we do that?
What do you think would be the best way to achieve
exactly that?
Well, we could simply add two more columns,
one to each side of these eight columns here in the middle.
So one here on the left side, so let's say here,
and then one here on the right side.
And we want both of them to occupy
the remaining of the space.
Does that make sense?
So what I just said translate into
one fractional unit in here,
and one fractional unit at the end.
So I hope that makes sense as well.
So let's check it out, and here we go.
So let's actually use our grid tool here as well.
And so here we go.
Let's see it down here as well.
And so this is what I was saying.
So we have our eight grids here in the middle,
the eight columns actually,
and then here on the right side and on the left side,
we have the one that occupied the remaining space.
So if we now decrease this viewport,
you will see that these ones
are the ones that start to shrink first.
So this last one and this one here.
So they started to shrink because the are the one
that occupy the fractional space, the remaining space.
And so that is kind of what we wanted,
having our eight columns centered right in the viewport.
Now if we hadn't this sidebar here, then you could've used
the margin: auto, zero trick.
So where the margin on the left and on the right side
are set to auto, and then that would center the element,
or all of these items, in the viewport.
Or we could also have used, of course,
the justify content property,
but that wouldn't have been perfect in this case as well.
And actually another reason why we want to do it like this
is what I'm gonna show you here,
and that's these sections here that go from one side
to the other.
And so that's what I call the full-bleed sections.
So you see that in here, for example, here on the top,
we have this here occupying only our eight columns
in the middle.
But if you then move down here,
you see that this full-bleed section actually goes
all the way from this side, here to the right side
of the viewport.
And the same thing you can see here in the gallery,
and actually even in the footer.
And also the header and top here.
And so these are the full-bleed sections,
and we then need these columns here on the left side
and on the right side to basically
break out of our predefined eight column grid
that we have in the middle of the page.
And so that's another thing that this layout here
allows us to do perfectly.
So this is perfect for having full-bleed sections
in the middle of some eight column sections.
And actually this is a trend that we've been seeing
more and more in web design,
which is having exactly that, what I just said.
So having a couple of design elements
which are centered in the viewport like we have here
with this eight columns,
but then sometimes we have some full-bleed sections
in the middle of that.
And so grid layout is perfect for doing exactly that
in a simple way.
So the first time that we actually set this up,
it's maybe not so simple,
but I hope that you understood the logic behind of this.
So again, we started with an eight column layout
that are these eight columns here,
then on the left side we added this sidebar,
and then we added this column here on the left side
and on the right side, which both occupy the remaining,
so the fractional space,
in order to center these eight columns
in the middle of the page.
And if you then want a full-bleed section,
we can occupy these contents here
and have a section that goes all the way from the left side
to the right side, for example.
And with that, we can kind of break
the inner eight column layout.
So I hope that does a lot of sense to you.
Now in order to make our life a bit easier
when we start placing the items,
let's actually name these column tracks here.
And so we already talked about it in our last section,
and so I'm gonna name this one here the sidebar-start,
and the sidebar-end.
And then remember that the grid line can have multiple names
and so this one will be also called the full-start,
because basically this is where we want to start
the full-bleed sections.
So imagine that we have a full-bleed section,
like I explained before, then that would start
right here after the sidebar
and would go all the way until the end.
So let me name the last grid line here as well,
so full-end.
Now the grid line that comes after this one here
I'm gonna call it the center-start,
because this is basically the beginning of our eight columns
and so that's the part
that's gonna stay centered in the middle.
And so this one is called the center,
so I'm gonna call this one center-start,
and then the grid line after this, the center-end.
And now finally we also want to name all of these columns,
and so we can do that, and we did it before actually,
and so we create a set of named lines.
So we do it in the repeat here,
and then this one is called, simply called start,
and then after, it is called end.
And remember that this is then going to create
eight col-starts, starting from number one
to number eight.
So we're gonna have col-start one, two, three,
all the way to eight, and the same thing for col-end.
Now before all of this starts confusing you,
let's actually use this in practice right now.
So let's start by placing the sidebar.
And so let's open it,
and we want the sidebar to start
from the grid line called sidebar-start to sidebar-end.
So sidebar-start and sidebar-end.
And then a second step is that we want it to span
all the way from the beginning of the grid
to the end, in terms of rows.
So grid-row, we want it to start right at the beginning
of our design.
Remember, so let me show it to you again.
So it starts right here, and goes all the way until the end.
And so what's like the keyword for the end?
That's right, it's minus one.
So it starts at the beginning and goes to the end.
And yeah, that's exactly what you see happening here.
So right now we only have two row tracks,
and so right now the sidebar is not as tall
as it is in our example,
but it'll of course start increasing
as we add more rows to the grid.
So let's continue, and maybe you're wondering
why we are not naming the rows,
we are only naming the columns and not the rows.
And that is because in an overall layout like this,
the focus is always more on the columns
and not so much on the rows.
So sometimes you might not even want to size the rows here
because sometimes all you really want to do
is set all your rows to fit to your content.
And in that case,
you only really need to define the columns,
because the columns are always more important.
So let's now do the features part.
So the features, remember, they go
from this part here, all the way to this part.
So basically from the beginning to the end
of our central eight grids.
And that's what we called the center here, right.
So remember that we called it center-start,
then we have the eight columns,
and then we have the grid line called center-end.
And so all we have to do is to use these names.
So grid-column,
center-start,
all the way to center-end.
And here we go.
So you see, it starts here,
and then it ends down here.
So exactly what we want it to have.
We also have the header, and the top three realtors,
but let's leave them for a bit later,
because these are not as straight-forward as the others.
And so let's actually now continue
with the gallery and the footer.
So the gallery we see goes all the way
from one end to the other end.
And so remember what we called this,
we call it the full, so the full-bleed section.
And so full-start, and full-end.
And so let's do that.
So grid-column starting at full-start,
and ending at full-end.
And the same actually for the footer,
so let's just copy this.
And let's check it out.
Moving down here,
and here you go.
So, the gallery spans all the way from the sidebar
here to the end, and as well as the footer.
Let's actually increase here the font size
of all of these items here at the same time.
And so I'm just gonna use it like this,
so I say that I want the container,
and then all of the right children.
And this is just here for development purposes,
so I'm gonna change that here in a second.
So let's just give all of these a 40 pixels of padding
and a font size of three rem.
Okay and again I'm gonna delete this later,
this is just so we can see a bit better
what's going on here.
And so our row's now a bit larger.
This is starting to look real good.
Now as for the homes, we actually want them
to be the same as the features.
So from start-center to start-end.
So homes,
grid-column,
starting from the grid line center-start
and go to center-end.
And exactly that's what happened.
So just like the features, it is occupying
our central eight grid part here, right.
Now of course we could've used here
just the line numbers here and simply make this start
from like line number three I think in this case,
so one, two, three it would've been.
And then say span, and then just add all of these numbers,
so spanning from number three to line 11.
But that would be highly impractical,
and so it's really much easier
to name our column lines like this.
So we defined the homes, features, gallery,
footer, and sidebar.
Next up let's think about the header and the realtors.
So let's come here to our original design,
and so you see that what I did here is to give
two parts of our eight columns to this realtors,
and six columns to the footer.
So basically six out of eight columns
are for the header here,
and two out of the eight columns are for the realtors.
And then of course we add this outer part here,
so here and here,
so that we end up with a full-bleed look here.
And so that is why these columns that we have here
in the middle are so useful,
because they allow us to build different kind of designs.
For example, if you come down here, you see that we used
this grid line here in the center to put one part
of this design on the left side,
and the other part here on the right side
of this central line.
So in this case, it's four columns for this picture
part of the story, and four columns for this content
part of the stories.
And so let's code that up as well.
So the header,
grid-column, it starts at full-start,
and that's not correct, so start,
so full-start is basically here right after the sidebar,
and it ends after the sixth columns.
So let's actually count this,
so this is the first line of this set,
so this is the column number one, two, three,
four, five, six, and seven.
And so this here is the end of column number six.
And so it translate into col-end six, right.
So remember from the intro lectures,
that when we have a named set of grid lines,
then we have to use the numbers.
And in this case, it ends after the sixth column.
And now the realtors, they didn't start right after that.
So grid-column, so col-start seven,
all the way until full-end.
So let's check that out.
And yeah, so that's exactly what we have here in our demo.
So you see, it's exactly the same.
So just to make sure that you understand why this works,
let's remember that this here is the first column.
So column-start, number one, two, three, four,
five, six, and seven.
And so it starts at the seventh column right here
and goes all the way until the end of course.
And so now all that's left to do
is to place the story pictures and story content,
'cause right now they are not really where
they are supposed to are.
So let's take a look at that again.
And yeah, I already explained that before.
So it goes all the way until the end of the fourth column,
and then the next one, so the content,
it starts at the beginning of the fifth column.
So let's do that.
So grid-column, full-start,
and it goes until col-end four.
So that's exactly what I said before, right.
And then this one goes from grid-column,
col-start five, so the fifth column, until
full-end.
And that should be it.
So let's check that out.
And yeah, it's correct.
That's exactly what we were looking for.
Awesome, so that's really great.
So with this, we finished our overall layout, actually.
So great, that's fantastic.
So it's really simple to create a complex layout like this,
and I think this is really rather complex,
so I tried to do something not all too weird,
but at the same time to go into some complexity
so that we don't just build another boring demo layout here.
So instead we went for a real-world look here
with this design.
Now one last thing that I want to change here
is something for this situation.
So imagine that we start decreasing here,
then of course our eight columns here
always stay nicely centered, right.
And you can see this very well here in this blue homes part.
So you see that it stays centered, of course,
and that's exactly what we defined.
But watch what happens as we really approach the width
of these eight columns.
So you see that at some point,
here this space on the left and on the right side
almost disappears.
And that's because this column here,
so this column track and this column track,
they are defined to be one fr, so one fraction
of the remaining space.
And so they do exactly what we told them to do.
But we actually don't want it to be quite like that,
because we usually always want to have some margin
between the content and the margin of the page.
And in this case, this really starts to stick here
to the sidebar.
And so that's not ideal,
and so what we can do is something very simple.
So what do you think we can do here?
Well, all we have to do here
is to use the minmax function here.
And so we say that we want this to be
between six rem, so 60 pixel, and one fractional unit.
And just like this, we will always keep a minimum
of 60 pixels on this side.
And of course, we want the same here on the other side.
So what we did with this is to ensure that this column
never gets smaller than six rem.
And instead, what will start to shrink
when there's not enough space to fit
these 40 rem columns here in the viewport,
will be the columns themselves.
So they are the ones who will start shrinking.
So let's take a look at that.
So as we approach,
you see, so we approach these 60 pixels here,
and let's actually inspect that.
Inspected element.
And actually we cannot, we cannot inspect it really.
Instead let's do it like this.
So here we see that this has 60 pixels,
so 60 times 511.
And so these 60 pixels is the six rem that we just defined.
So that's the minimum that this column will always have
no matter what.
And so as we now decrease the viewport,
the columns will start to shrink.
And so what this does is that it basically
ensures that there's always a margin between the content
and the end of the page.
And so with that, our layout is actually really completed.
There's nothing more we have to add,
and we are ready to now build all of these sections
one by one.
So I know that this was probably rather complex
for a beginner like you,
but that's why I build this layout here step by step,
starting with just eight columns,
and then going up from there,
until we reached, in the end, this fully-fledged design.
So once more, I want you to really understand
what happened here, and to experiment with it
in case you didn't.
So it's really important that before moving forward,
you are 100% sure you know what we did here.
So that this really makes sense to you.
And if you have any questions,
and of course you can post it to the Q&A section
on Udemy, and you will get then help there,
so that you can make sure that you understand
100% what's going on here so that you can
build your own layouts in the future.
And they will not always be like this,
so sometimes it may be a bit simpler
and you just have to use then the tools that I gave you
to build your own layout.
So you may not always have like a sidebar,
or some of the things that I have here.
They might not really apply to your own particular design.
But as I said before, I wanted to have something
more complex so that we can actually apply
all of the contents that we learned before
to this real world situation.
But enough talking, let's move on to the next video
and start building this web page.